.\" Licensed under the Gnu Public License, Version 2
.\"
.\" $Id: ssystem.1.2   1996/06/30 13:33:54 bousch Exp $
.\"
.TH ARIBAS 1 "February 2001" "ARIBAS"

.SH NAME
aribas \- Multiprecision Arithmetic Interpreter

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aribas
[\fIoptions\fR] [<\fIari-file\fR> [<\fIarg1\fR> <\fIarg2\fR> ...]]

This man page was written for Debian since the orginal software
did not contain a man page.

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBAribas\fR is an interactive interpreter suitable for big integer
arithmetic and multiprecision floating point arithmetic.
It has a syntax similar to Pascal or Modula-2, but contains also
features from other programming languages like C, Lisp, Oberon.

.\"---------------------------------------------------------
.SH USAGE
The simplest way to use \fBaribas\fR is as a calculator for (big integer)
arithmetic. After \fBaribas\fR is started, it displays a prompt
.BR ==>  
and is ready to accept input. Simply enter the
expression you want to calculate, followed by a full stop,
and then press RETURN, for example
.nf

    ==> 123 + 456*789.

.fi
\fBAribas\fR answers
.nf

    -: 359907

.fi
The symbol \fB-:\fR introduces the result.
.br
.BR IMPORTANT.
To mark the end of your input, you must always type a full stop `.' 
and then press RETURN.
.br
.PP
You can assign the result of a calculation to a variable, as in
.nf

    ==> F6 := 2**64 + 1.
    -: 18446_74407_37095_51617
 
.fi
This calculates the 6th Fermat number (\fB**\fR denotes exponentiation)
and assigns it to the variable \fBF6\fR (note that \fBaribas\fR is case
sensitive, so this is not the same as \fBf6\fR).  Later you can use
this variable for example in the expression
.nf

    ==> 123**(F6 - 1) mod F6.
    -: 688_66214_58712_63971 

.fi
which shows (by Fermat's theorem) that F6 is not a prime number.
.br
The three most recent results are stored in the pseudo variables
\fB_\fR, \fB__\fR, and \fB___\fR. For example you can store the last 
result in the variable x by the command
.nf

    ==> x := _.
    -: 688_66214_58712_63971
 
.fi
As you can see in the above examples, \fBaribas\fR uses the underscore
\fB_\fR to structure the output of big integers (>= 2**32). Also for input
of integers you may use the underscore, the only condition is that
immediately before and after the underscore there are digits, example:
.nf

    ==> z := 123_4567_890.
    -: 1234567890
 
.fi
Here the output contains no underscore, which shows that z is less
than 2**32.
.P
\fBAribas\fR has several built-in functions for factorization, for example
\fIrho_factorize\fR, which uses Pollard's rho algorithm.
.nf

    ==> rho_factorize(F6).

    working ..
    factor found after 512 iterations

    -: 274177
 
.fi
To find the remaining cofactor, give the command
.nf

    ==> x := F6 div _.
    -: 6728_04213_10721
 
.fi
To test whether this factor is prime, Rabin's probabilistic test
\fIrab_primetest\fR can be applied:
.nf

    ==> rab_primetest(x).
    -: true
 
.fi
The function \fIrho_factorize\fR is good for finding small factors
(say up to 10 decimal digits); for more complicated factorization
tasks a more powerful algorithm like the quadratic sieve
\fIqs_factorize\fR should be used
.nf

    ==> qs_factorize(2**128+1).

.fi
(Depending on the power of your computer, it will take a few seconds
up to a few minutes to get a prime factor of the 7th Fermat number.)

.\"---------------------------------------------------------
.SS Control structures
The \fIfor\fR loop and the \fIwhile\fR loop in \fBaribas\fR have a syntax
as in Modula-2. For example, the following command sequence
calculates the factorial of 100.
.nf

    ==> x := 1;
        for i := 2 to 100 do
            x := x*i;
        end;
        x.

.fi
As you can see in this example, the input may extend over several lines.
.P
The above \fIfor\fR loop is equivalent to the following \fIwhile\fR loop
.nf

    ==> x := 1; i := 2;
        while i <= 100 do
            x := x*i;
            inc(i);
        end;
        x.

.fi
.P
The branching construct
.br
.B if
.I ...
.B then
.I ...
.B elsif
.I ...
.B else
.I ...
.B end
.br
has also the same syntax as in Modula-2.
.\"---------------------------------------------------------
.SS Multiprecision floating point arithmetic
\fBAribas\fR supports different types of floating point numbers which 
are internally represented with mantissas of different bit-length:
.nf

        single_float    32 bits
        double_float    64 bits
        long_float     128 bits

.fi
and several higher precisions up to an implementation dependent 
limit, typically 1024 or 4096 bits, which can be determined by
the function \fImax_floatprec()\fR. By default, when
calculating with numbers of data type \fIreal\fR, single_floats 
are used. This corresponds to a precision of 9 to 10 decimal places.
A precision of 4096 bits corresponds to over 1200 decimal places.

The precision can be changed using the function
\fIset_floatprec\fR. The function takes one integer argument,
which is the desired precision in bits. It is automatically
rounded to the next higher available value. For example,
after
.nf

    ==> set_floatprec(100).
    -: 128

.fi
the floating point precision is 128 bits and you can calculate
.nf

    ==> arctan(sqrt(3)).
    -: 1.04719_75511_96597_74615_42144_61093_16762_8

    ==> _/pi.
    -: 0.33333_33333_33333_33333_33333_33333_33333_33

.fi
.\"---------------------------------------------------------
.SS User defined functions
The user can define his or her own functions. A typical example looks like
.nf

    ==> function fac(n: integer): integer;
        var
            x,i: integer;
        begin
            x := 1;
            for i := 2 to n do
                x := x*i;
            end;
            return x;
        end.

.fi
If you have entered this correctly, \fBaribas\fR echoes the function name
.nf

    -: fac

.fi
and from now on you can use \fIfac\fR in the same way as a built-in
function, e.g.
.nf

    ==> fac(32).
    -: 2_63130_83693_36935_30167_21801_21600_00000
 
.fi
Note that inside function definitions all used variables must
be explicitly declared, whereas on top level of the \fBaribas\fR interpreter
variables can be simply created by assignments. Here is another example,
which shows some other data types supported by \fBaribas\fR:
.nf

    ==> function sqrt_list(n: integer): array of real;
        var
            vec: array[n] of real;
            i: integer;
        begin
            for i := 1 to n do
                vec[i-1] := sqrt(i);
            end;
            return vec;
        end.

.fi
This function returns an array of the square roots of the integers
from 1 to n, for example
.nf

    ==> sqrt_list(10).
    -: (1.00000000, 1.41421356, 1.73205081, 2.00000000, 
    2.23606798, 2.44948974, 2.64575131, 2.82842712, 3.00000000, 
    3.16227766)

.fi 
In a bigger programming project where you need several functions
you would not enter them directly at the \fBaribas\fR prompt but
prepare the function definitions with an external text editor
and save them in a file  with the extension \fB.ari\fR , for
example \fBabcd.ari\fR . This file can then be loaded by \fBaribas\fR
using the command
.nf

    ==> load("abcd").

.fi
If there is a syntax error in the file, you get an error message
of the form
.nf
    
    error in line <= 23 of loaded file
    if: end expected

.fi
which tells you (in this example) that there is an error in the \fBif\fR
construct in line 23 or earlier in the file. (Note that the error 
messages are sometimes not very precise.) You can then correct the 
error and load the file again.
.\"--------------------------------------------------------
.SS Online help
The command
.nf

    ==> symbols(aribas).

.fi
returns a list of all keywords and names of builtin functions of \fBaribas\fR.
This list has about 180 entries, and begins and ends as follows:
.P
(ARGV, _, __, ___, abs, alloc, and, arccos, arcsin, arctan, arctan2, aribas,
array, atof, atoi, begin, binary, bit_and, bit_clear, 
bit_length, ...... , tolower, toupper, transcript, true, trunc, type, 
user, var, version, while, write, write_block, write_byte, writeln)
.P
For most of the symbols in this list, you can get a short online
help using the function \fIhelp()\fR. For example, the command
.nf

    ==> help(ARGV).

.fi
gives an information on the builtin variable \fIARGV\fR, whereas
.nf

    ==> help(while).

.fi
describes the syntax of the \fIwhile\fR loop. If you need more information
than that contained in the online help, consult the documentation
which can be found in \fI/usr/share/doc/aribas\fR.
.\"--------------------------------------------------------
.SS How to exit
To end an \fBaribas\fR session, type \fIexit\fR at the \fBaribas\fR prompt
.nf

    ==> exit

.fi
and then press the RETURN (ENTER) key.
.P
If you don't want to leave \fBaribas\fR, but want to break out of an
infinite loop or a calculation that lasts too long, type
CONTROL-C (if you are running \fBaribas\fR from within Emacs, you
must press CONTROL-C twice). This will (in most cases) stop the
current calculation and return to the \fBaribas\fR prompt.
.P
When you are not using the Emacs interface but the command line
version of \fBaribas\fR, you sometimes get into the 
following situation: Some previous line contains a typing error,
but you cannot return to that line to correct it. 
In this case you should simply type a full stop `\fB.\fR' , 
followed by RETURN. You will
get an error message which you can safely ignore, and a new prompt
\fB==>\fR appears, allowing you to try again.
.\"--------------------------------------------------------
.SH COMMAND LINE ARGUMENTS
.PP
.B aribas
[\fIoptions\fR] [<\fIari-file\fR> [<\fIarg1\fR> <\fIarg2\fR> ...]]

.SS options
The following options are available:
.TP
.B -q
(quiet mode) Suppresses all messages to the screen (version no,
copyright notice, etc.) when \fBaribas\fR is started
.TP
.B -v  
(verbose mode, default) Does not suppress messages to the screen when
\fBaribas\fR is started.
.TP
.B -c <cols>
\fBaribas\fR does its own line breaking when writing to the screen.
Normally it supposes that the screen (or the window in which \fBaribas\fR
runs) has 80 columns. With the -c option you can set another number,
which must be between 40 and 160 (in decimal representation).  For
example, if you run \fBaribas\fR in an Xterm window with 72 columns, use the
option -c72 (or -c 72, the space between -c and the number is
optional).
.TP
.B -m <mem>
Here <mem> is a number (in decimal representation) between 64 and
16000. This number indicates how many Kilobytes of RAM \fBaribas\fR should
use for the \fBaribas\fR heap. The default value depends on the options used
when \fBaribas\fR was compiled. Typically, under UNIX or LINUX it is 6
Megabytes, corresponding to -m6000
.TP
.B -h <path of help file>
The online help of \fBaribas\fR depends on a file aribas.hlp which should be
situated  in the range of the environment variable PATH. If this is not
the case you can specify the exact path of the help file with the -h
option. If for example the file aribas.hlp is in the directory
/usr/local/lib, use the option -h /usr/local/lib (the space after -h
is not necessary).  The -h option can also be used if the help file
has a different name. If the help file is named help-aribas and lies
in the directory /home/joe/ari, use -h/home/joe/ari/help-aribas.

With a properly installed Debian package of \fBaribas\fR it should
not be necessary to use this option.
.TP
.B -p <ari-search-path>
With this option you can specify a search path for loading files with
\fBaribas\fR source code. <ari-search-path> may be either the
(absolute) pathname of one directory or several pathnames separated by
colons.  Suppose that you have called \fBaribas\fR with the option

	-p/usr/local/lib/aribas:~/ari/examples 

and that your home directory is /home/alice/. Then the command

	==> load("factor").

will search the file factor.ari first in the current directory,
then in the directory /usr/local/lib/aribas and finally in
/home/alice/ari/examples.

.TP
.B -b
Batch mode when loading an \fBaribas\fR source code file from
the command line, see below.

.P
One letter options which require no arguments may be merged,
for example

    aribas -q -b

is equivalent to

    aribas -qb

.\"---------------------------------------------------------
.SS Further command line arguments
.TP
.B <ari-file>
The next command line argument after the options is interpreted
as the name of a file with \fBaribas\fR source code. If the file name
has the extension .ari, this extension may be omitted. The file
is loaded as if the command \fIload("<ari-file>")\fR had been given
after the start of \fBaribas\fR at the \fBaribas\fR prompt. If the file is 
not found in the current directory it is searched in the 
directories specified by the -p option.
If the option -b was given, the file is loaded and executed.
Afterwards \fBaribas\fR exits without showing it's prompt. If
the file cannot be loaded completely because of an error,
\fBaribas\fR exits immediately after the error message.
.TP
.B <arg1> <arg2> ...
When further command line arguments follow \fI<ari-file>\fR, they
are collected (as strings) together with \fI<ari-file>\fR in the vector 
\fIARGV\fR which can be accessed from within \fBaribas\fR.
Example: If you call \fBaribas\fR with the command line

	aribas startup 4536 eisenstein

and the current directory contains the file startup.ari, then
\fBaribas\fR loads it and the vector \fIARGV\fR has the form
.nf

    ==> ARGV.
    -: ("startup", "4536", "eisenstein")

.fi
If you need some arguments as numbers and not as strings, you can
transform them by \fIatoi\fR (or \fIatof\fR); 
in our example
.nf

    ==> x := atoi(ARGV[1]).
    -: 4536

.fi
will do it. The length of the vector \fIARGV\fR can be determined by
\fIlength(ARGV)\fR.
.\"-------------------------------------------------------------
.SH RUNNING ARIBAS WITHIN EMACS

You can run \fBaribas\fR from within Emacs by giving the command
(in Emacs' minibuffer)
.nf

  	M-x run-aribas

.fi
(If you don't have a META key, use ESC x instead of M-x)
Then \fBaribas\fR will be loaded into an Emacs window with name 
*aribas* and you can edit your input to \fBaribas\fR with the usual
Emacs commands.
.P
If your input ends with a full stop '.' and you press RETURN,
it is sent to \fBaribas\fR.
If however your complete input does not end with a full stop,
(for example in response to a \fIreadln\fR), the input is sent 
to \fBaribas\fR by C-j (Control-j) or C-c RETURN.
.P
If you want to repeat a previous input, M-p (or ESC p) cycles backward
through input history, and M-n (or ESC n) cycles forward.
.P
A Control-C is sent to \fBaribas\fR by C-c C-c (press C-c twice).
.P
It is also possible to start \fBaribas\fR from Emacs with
command line arguments. For this purpose the command
.nf

  	C-u M-x run-aribas

.fi
has to be given. Then a prompt
.nf

  	run-aribas: aribas

.fi
appears in the Minibuffer of Emacs and you can complete the
command line, for example
.nf

  	run-aribas: aribas startup 4536 eisenstein

.fi
(see above).
.\"-------------------------------------------------------------
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE

Options for running \fBaribas\fR can be specified also using a 
configuration file with name \fB.arirc\fR. 
\fBAribas\fR searches for a configuration file in the
following order:

    1) the current directory
    2) the home directory of the user

There is a third possibility: You can define an environment variable
\fBARIRC\fR containing the name of the configuration file (which may be
different from .arirc), including the full path.

In the configuration file you can specify all command line options
described above which begin with a - sign, however a separate
line must be used for every single option. Lines beginning with
the character # or empty lines are ignored.
In addition to the options described above, the configuration
file may contain \fBaribas\fR source code. For this purpose there
must be a line reading

.B -init

Then everything after this line is treated as \fBaribas\fR source code
and executed when \fBaribas\fR is started.

The existence of a configuration file for \fBaribas\fR does not exclude
the possibility to give command line arguments. If an option
(e.g. the -m option) is specified both in the configuration file
and the command line but with different values, then the 
specification at the command line is valid. Analogously, a -v
option on the command line overrides a -q option in the configuration
file.
If there is -init code in the configuration file and an <ari-file>
argument at the command line, then the -init code is executed first 
and afterwards the <ari-file> is loaded and its code executed.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B $ARIRC,  .arirc, $HOME/.arirc

Optional configuration file.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.B $ARIRC
Location of the optional configuration file.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR emacs (1)
.P
More information on how to use \fBaribas\fR 
can be found in \fI/usr/share/doc/aribas\fR.
.P
The \fBaribas\fR home page is
\fIhttp://www.mathematik.uni-muenchen.de/~forster/sw/aribas.html\fR.
.\"-------------------------------------------------------------
.SH BUGS
Bug reports should be sent by email to

    forster@mathematik.uni-muenchen.de

.SH AUTHOR
Otto Forster <forster@mathematik.uni-muenchen.de> is the author of
the aribas program. This man page was compiled by Ralf Treinen
<treinen@debian.org> from the aribas documentation for the Debian
package of aribas, and supplemented by the author.

